*don corleone.*
© 2000 Jamie Zawinski <./> <jwz@jwz.org> <../contact.html>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

So a good friend and I were planning on going on a vacation
<http://www.burningman.com/> together, along with a bunch of our other
friends. I had been friends with this guy for years, but he had recently
gotten rich at an internet startup. He had always been an upbeat,
energetic guy, but this latest turn just sent his self-confidence
through the roof.

Anyway, we were making preparations for the trip, and somehow it had
come to pass that his bicycle <doorprize.html> was at my house. I called
him up to discuss how to get it from here to where it needed to be, and
got his voicemail <cell.html>. I was on my way out, so I said, ``well, I
guess I'll just assume that this is your problem and you'll coordinate
with me about when you're going to pick it up.''

He called back and said that assuming it was his problem wasn't fair
since it was at my house, so it was ``our'' problem. Then he launched
into a rather long speech about how doing this was really what I wanted
so that I'd have karma points with him while we were on this trip,
because he was the life <park.html> of the party, he was the guy you
wanted have something owed to you by, blah blah blah. I said to him,

    ``So, instead of trying to buy people all the time, why don't you
    try just saying /please/?'' 

He paused: this seemed to kind of throw him for a loop. Finally he said,

    ``This is how I say please.'' 

And that was pretty much the problem with him, in a nutshell: his
relationships were based on power <electricity.html>. He had some kind
of Don Corleone fantasy going on, that he was this Godfather figure:
``some day, and that day may never come, I may ask a favor of you.'' He
just loved having people in his debt. He was incredibly generous, but he
always let you know that /he/ was /giving/ you something. It was clear
to everyone that none of his generosity was without strings, and I
wasn't the only one who found this gross <greed.html>.

I tried to talk to him about this, about how he had changed, how he was
treating people differently. One of his professed goals at the time was
to travel around the world, spend a couple of weeks in one city then
move on to the next, and do this for several years. This confused me: it
really didn't sound like any fun, because if you did that, you'd always
be a stranger. You'd never know anyone <random.html> for longer than a
few weeks! You'd rarely see your close friends, and you'd never get
close to anyone, you just wouldn't have time.

He claimed to think that, because of the starry wisdom
<wisdom-teeth.html> that his new favorite drug (Ecstasy) has given him,
he had this superhuman ability to tell when people were trying to use
him, and when they were really his friends, so that he would not be in
danger of attracting sycophants. He /understood/ people so much better
now, you see. He also thought that this incredible chemical empathy also
let him have friendships in a /tenth/ the time of other people (``why
does it have to be about hours logged?'' he asked.) So the fact that he
would be flitting <spot.html> all over the world and only ever hanging
out with people for a few days or weeks and then not seeing them again
would not mean that he wouldn't have lasting friendships. They would be
deep, lasting friendships that happened to only last a few weeks.

Then it got worse from there: he turned into a drug dealer. Well, I
suppose ``dealer'' isn't the right word, since he didn't charge people
money for it, but he found that providing drugs <pisstest.html> to his
so-called friends in massive quantities would leave them feeling even
/more/ indebted to him, or at least, more likely to hang around with
him. What more efficient way to collect a set of shallow friends,
superficial acquaintances, groupies and hangers-on?

He had an assembly line <slaughter.html> going on at one point -- there
were like 20 or 30 people he was providing with drugs for the evening,
and they were all trying to pile into his RV <sink.html> to get them. He
kicked them out and told them to come in one at a time. His brand new
girlfriend would stand at the door and say ``next'', and someone would
come in. ``What do you need?'' ``I need two hits of ecstasy, and half a
hit of acid <singleminded.html>.'' He would then dole it out from his
giant zip-lock bag of candy. ``Thanks, man,'' would say his new best
friend <identity.html> for the night.

    Someone else once said to me, ``I think that some people's brains
    are wired in such a way that once they hit a certain `money
    threshhold' they feel compelled, and indeed, maybe, a certain moral
    obligation, to act like complete fucking morons.'' 

I haven't spoken to my former pal in more than a year. I understand he
hasn't wrapped himself around a telephone pole just yet.

Don't do drugs, kids. Stay in school.

This is just one example of a pattern I've seen repeated many times.
It's not always about drugs, but it's always about money.

I've read a lot of hype about how these crazy young kids make their
millions and then keep living in the same hovel <woodland.html> they did
before, and never actually spend their money, and so on -- I'm sure
you've read articles like that too. But you know, in my experience, it's
just not true. I've known dozens of instant-millionaires so far (from
Netscape as well as other companies), and basically, I don't speak to
any of them any more, because the money changed them and turned them
into fairly creepy people. People who spend $10k on a wristwatch
<wrists.html> and then brag about it (while trying to aloofly sound like
they're not bragging about it.) People whose sense of self-worth
<design.html> has gone nonlinear, because when they look at their
brokerage statement, they forget that, while skill was certainly a
component of why they got to where they did, luck was also a huge
component. Most of these people have never worked for a company that
built a good product and failed anyway. They don't have any
understanding of the fact that skill is often necessary, but always
insufficient. They believe their hype.

And I've come to realize that I just don't like rich people.

This is pretty inconvenient, because it means that all of my friends are
still non-rich people, which means they have day jobs <litany.html>, and
can't come out and play. This is a big part of why I went and strapped
myself back on the treadmill <http://www.dnalounge.com/>, and started a
new company: not because I felt any desire to work, but because I
couldn't think of anything better to do during the day. Simply because I
was not sufficiently in touch with my inner Slack
<http://www.subgenius.com/pam1/pamphlet_p1.html>.

I keep asking people if money has changed me, but they assure me that,
no, I'm still the same obnoxious asshole I always was. So at least
there's that.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[ up ] <./>

