---
layout: post
title: "ToorCamp 2012"
date: 2012-08-12 00:00
comments: true
categories: conference camp
---
{% flickr_image 7779403804 m right %}
I attended [ToorCamp 2012](http://toorcamp.org/), the "five day, open air, tech camping event" in Washington State.

We managed to find the one place in Washington state where it is freezing cold and damp in the summertime. I think it 
just touches the current that eventually makes the Bay Area so frigid.

**Things I would never do anywhere else:** program a robot to dance, hold a sword receiving blasts of purple lighting bolts 
from a Gauss gun, worship at the Church of Robotron, get a preview of a cool interactive 
toy [Star](http://starsimpson.com/) was working on, help assemble a tower built of pipes to validate one of [Miloh](https://twitter.com/miloh)'s theories
about constructing large structures with struts of uniform length, attend a bicycle jousting event....

<!-- more -->

Incidentally, it is fun to terrorize small children with robots. Hacked on MC Hawkings software so it could be remotely controlled.
Was a bit surprised that it was all in Java (it's some standard package for doing robots, apparently). That made consuming a 
line-oriented protcol super annoying, and my more unixy style of programming is a bit foreign to Java, but we eventually made it work.

**Spontaneously taught:** Haskell, how unix process forking works (I am amazed sometimes at what younger hackers don't know. Almost got into an argument about the 
existence of copy-on-write and file descriptors. I'm not making this stuff up, people)

**Spontaneously learned:** lock picking, the chemistry of baking, how to turn kelp into a musical instrument, Bitcoin, blinding, LASERS 

**Conversations I would never have anywhere else:** transgender hacker still adapting to her new life, Egyptian activist on 
exactly how influential the internet was in the 2010-2011 revolution, how to set up your own GSM phone service

> -- _Why isn't the phone network working yet ?_
>
> -- We're syncing with the satellite. This will take another six hours.
> 
> -- _Isn't there some quick and dirty way to do this?_
>
> -- This IS the quick and dirty way.

It's the kind of conference where you overhear a woman talking about her sex toy experiments and how nobody else seems to do this, and not one but
two bystanders inform her she should be talking to [qDot](https://twitter.com/qDot).

{% tweet https://twitter.com/flipzagging/status/234389882892587008 %}

{% flickr_set 72157631060482422 %}

**Also:** DuckTales.
